#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass llncs
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Simplifying OMG MOF-based Metamodeling with Scala
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
This paper proposes a functional programming paradigm for specifying OMG's
 metamodels and profiles such as UML and SysML to address several fundamental
 issues in OMG's metamodeling architecture based on OMG's Meta-Object Facility
 (MOF) and OMG's model interchange strategy based on OMG's XML Model Interchange
 (XMI) serialization.
 The fundamental issue in OMG's MOF architecture is that it is intended
 to be reflexively defined in terms of a subset of UML.
 The complexity of MOF is a consequence of a convoluted attempt to support
 two different paradigms for the semantics of associations: the Essential
 MOF (EMOF) paradigm seeks to a follow an object-oriented approach where
 the semantics of an association is equivalent to that of a pair of class
 properties.
 In contrast, the Complete MOF (CMOF) paradigm seeks to give associations
 a first class semantic status similar to that of classes.
 Unfortunately, both EMOF and CMOF paradigms suffer from the complexity
 that properties can play multiple roles.
 CMOF adds considerable complexity by including UML's partially specified
 notion of property subsetting and redefinition.
 The key simplification described in this paper involves replacing UML's
 shared syntactic notion of property with special cases reduced to their
 essential characteristics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The OMG Model Interchange Working Group (MIWG) has sought to address long
 standing problems with OMG's XMI specification, both in terms of implementation
 complexity due to a myriad of serialization options and end user difficulties
 for practical model interchange across tools claiming conformance to the
 same revisions of OMG's specifications.
 Thanks to the MIWG efforts from tool vendors and users, the OMG published
 the Canonical XMI 2.5.1 specification annex which minimizes the serialization
 variability problems of past OMG XMI revisions.
 However, Canonical XMI 2.5.1 cannot fundamentally solve the model interchange
 problems that end users encounter in practice because it does not provide
 any mechanism to account for the fundamental difference between official
 OMG modeling specifications (e.g.
 UML, SysML) and the actual tool-specific implementations.
 The key simplification described in this paper involves replacing the reflexive
 OMG MOF architecture with a non-reflexive MOF architecture that can fundamental
ly account for defining the abstract syntax of OMG modeling specifications
 (e.g.
 UML, SysML) as well as that of tool-specific implementations.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This paper makes three significant contributions towards addressing significant
 issues with the OMG UML 2.5 specification:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Define a tool-neutral Application Program Interface (API) adaptable to tools
 claiming abstract syntax conformance to OMG UML 2.5.
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Standard
Unfortunately, the OMG stopped the UML 1.x practice of publishing revisions
 of UML 2 with an 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Interface Definition Language
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (IDL) API.
 Consequently, the OMG UML 2.5 specification lacks an objective basis for
 assessing whether 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

a tool demonstrating abstract syntax conformance provides a user interface
 and/or API that enables instances of concrete UML metaclasses to be created,
 read, updated, and deleted.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This paper contributes a novel approach for generating and specifying a
 strongly type-safe abstract syntax API for OMG UML 2.5 parameterized by
 a tool-specific adapter for an existing implementation of UML 2.5.
 This API has been adapted for two existing UML 2.5 tools: NoMagic's MagicDraw
 version 18.0 and Eclipse UML version 5.0.
 The paper describes an approach for generating a suite of abstract syntax
 conformance tests that cold be used for objectively assessing the compliance
 of OMG UML 2.5 tool implementations and for objectively assessing model
 interchange via tool-specific API adapters instead of via external serializatio
n as done before.
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Enumerate
Define a set of 4th normal form database tables and relationships enabling
 a radically simpler tabular serialization of UML models compared to the
 complex tree serialization of UML models based on OMG's XMI 2.5 specification.
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Standard
For serialization, the OMG chose to represent the abstract syntax containment
 organization of a UML model as an XML tree.
 This seems a sensible choice given that a tree precisely captures the key
 architecture principle of single element ownership that applies to all
 OMG modeling languages, including UML.
 The complexity arises from two factors: 1) logically, a given tuple of
 owning element and owned element can be a link instance of multiple composite
 associations defined in the UML metamodel and 2) logically, the lack of
 clarity in the criteria for determining which composite association requires
 a serialization as an XML nested element from others requring serialization
 as an XML element reference.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
From a database perspective, the abstract syntax containment organization
 of a UML model is a materialized view of the information.
 The UML metamodel (a materialized view) has information redundancy that
 induces serialization redundancy: for example, every class-owned association
 end in the UML metamodel is both an attribute of its owning class and a
 member end of its association.
 Much of the complexity in OMG's XMI specification is an accidental consequence
 of trying to avoid unecessary redundant serialization.
 Normalizing the UML metamodel removes all information redundancy: for example,
 every association owns both ends.
 This paper presents a 4th-normal form of a UML metamodel where every metaclass
 is reduced to a table with only data property attributes and every association
 is reduced to a relationship table with an ordering data property attribute
 if one association end property is ordered.
 For a large model of a space mission (over 0.5 million UML elements), normal
 form serialization is considerably faster than the native tool-specific
 XMI tree serialization.
 
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Enumerate
Define a description logic formalization of UML's abstract syntax for reasoning
 about UML syntax precisely instead of informally per the UML specification.
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Standard
UML provides a rich vocabulary for describing the structure and behavior
 of arbitrary systems.
 The UML vocabulary is extensible to accomodate domain-specific language
 modeling needs with the concept of UML profile extensions of the UML metamodel
 such as the Systems Modeling Language (SysML) for the domain of systems
 engineering.
 A typical concern in the development of a UML profile extension of UML/SysML
 for a domain-specific Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) methodology
 is whether the intended expressiveness of the extended vocabulary in the
 specific domain can be represented as a well-formed UML/SysML model with
 the domain-specific profile applied.
 A serious concern is the limitations from the UML abstract syntax that
 prevent using the UML vocabulary for reasonable domain-specific modeling
 purposes.
 For example, the 6 of the 12 significant issues fixed in the OMG SysML
 1.4 revision provide support for explicitly representing in the abstract
 syntax notions of scope and context that are currently implicit in the
 UML 2.5 abstract syntax.
 Unfortunately, the SysML 1.4 specification does not address the logical
 implications for managing the SysML extensions when the underlying UML
 elements are created, read, updated or deleted.
 This paper presents a simple strategy for leveraging a 4th normal form
 definition of the abstract syntax of UML and profile extensions such as
 SysML as the basis for ontological reasoning about extended UML models.
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Standard
This paper is organized as follows....
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Background & Motivation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Key factors contributing to UML's accidental complexity include:
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
The labor-intensive, error-prone OMG process for maintaining and evolving
 the UML specification
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Circular definition of UML in terms of an extended subset of itself
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
An overly complex tree serialization model (XMI)
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
The practical consequences affecting UML's stakeholders:
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
Difficulties for OMG UML revision task force members to understand and analyze
 the impact of proposed changes to the UML metamodel
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Difficulties for UML tool vendors to provide verifiable evidence of their
 tool's conformance to the UML specification
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Limited interoperatibility for UML users working with different UML tool
 implementations
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Section
A Tool-neutral API for UML's Abstract Syntax
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
